Good morning. How's everybody doing?
>> [cheering]
>> All right. All right, a little bit
better. Hey, thank you all for being
here. We really appreciate it. We do
this as a service to the community
because we are living through important
times.
And it's an honor for us to be able to
serve as a bit of a gathering place for
people to come together. And this is by
far the best agenda we put together and
by far the best set of attendees. And so
we just want to start out by saying
thank you. We know you are all crazy
busy. Thank you for being here today.
>> [applause]
>> So, we do have a pretty exceptional
agenda put together as per usual.
Sonia
in the impeccable outfit
Constantine and [snorts] I are going to
say a couple of words to start. You
know, we have we have the privilege of
being in the midst of a lot of
conversations with a lot of interesting
people. And so once a year we like to
try to synthesize that a little bit and
share back with you what it is we've
been hearing. And so I'll say a few
words of overall
calibration and then Sonia will say a
bit about what we see today and then
Constantine will say a bit about what we
think might be coming tomorrow.
So, for calibration
we're going to start by zooming out.
Going back to the silicon [snorts] based
transistors which gave this area its
name.
They got built into systems connected by
networks that went public in the form of
the internet, supported applications
like social media and the cloud,
eventually showed up on our pockets in
mobile devices that today
are capable of doing something
indistinguishable from magic which is
AI.
The reason we like to show this slide
and those of you who've been here in the
past have seen this before
is because it reminds us
that all of these waves are additive.
And we sort of needed all of these
decades of evolution to have the
compute, the bandwidth, the data, the
talent to make the most of this moment.
Now this AI wave is a little bit
different in three ways. First
it's the biggest wave yet.
And that's generally true, but there is
something more specifically true about
this wave.
Which is it is the first one that is
both software and services.
The top row shows the first 15 years of
the cloud transition where the TAM for
software
went from about 350 billion to 650
billion and cloud grew to be about 400
billion of that.
The bottom row is what is brand new.
This is the services revenue
that seems to also be available now.
$10 trillion is a conveniently round
number. We don't know if it's 10
trillion or 5 trillion or 50 trillion.
We do know that legal services in the US
alone is a $400 market.
That is one vertical
and one geo.
And it's the same as all of software.
So this opportunity is immense.
Point number two
fastest wave yet.
I think we can all feel this.
What it means
is that this white space, and I direct
your attention to the AI side of this
page this white space
is getting filled pretty fast.
These logos
are the companies that got to a billion
plus of revenue as a result of the cloud
mobile and now AI tectonic shifts.
And at current course and speed
there are more coming soon.
Point number three
which is probably the most interesting
one and I borrowed this
from my partner Constantine
is that there are two basic kinds of
revolutions in technology.
There are revolutions of communication
which are about the way information is
distributed.
Most of the people in this room have
only lived through revolutions in
communication.
The internet
the cloud
mobile
those are all about information
distribution. Those were revolutions in
communication.
AI is different.
AI is this one.
AI is a revolution in computation. It's
about how information is processed.
And that might sound like semantics, but
these are fundamentally different shapes
of waves.
And maybe the most visceral way to feel
this
is to think about the fact that the
floor keeps moving underfoot. The
technology foundation
on which everybody builds
changes every day when new capabilities
come out.
And we've had three major inflection
points
over the last handful of years. First
one
chat GPT chat GPT moment, November 2022,
the world saw the power of pre-training.
Second one, couple years later
01 model reasoning.
All of a sudden a second scaling law
emerges around inference time compute.
Third one
just recently
cloud code no plus 45 now 47.
The world saw the power of long horizon
agents.
And while these look like three points
on a continuum
it's kind of a heartbreak between two
and three. It's a little bit of a
discontinuous change.
And if we may may be so bold
we would say
that this is AGI.
And look
I'm an econ major
we're venture capitalists
not about to propose a technical
definition for AGI. Okay, we study
founders and markets and the collision
thereof which is businesses.
But we do study businesses. And so from
a commercial standpoint, from a
practical standpoint from a functional
standpoint if you can dispatch an agent
to do a job and it can recover from
failure and persist until that job is
done
I don't know. That feels pretty much
like AGI.
Even if you don't think it's AGI, which
is fine.
By the way, Sonia will talk a lot more
about this in her part.
Even if you don't think it's AGI
I think we can all see that the cars
have arrived.
Last few years we've had a lot of faster
horses.
Applications that made you 10 or 40%
more productive, but didn't
fundamentally change the way you work.
Now we're starting to see cars.
Applications that make you 10 or 40X
more productive.
And absolutely change the way that you
work. Change the nature of your work.
Change the nature of your organization.
Cars have arrived.
This is the founder of Sequoia, Don
Valentine. He was famous
for asking one question.
So what?
Why does all this stuff matter?
>> [clears throat]
>> Well, it matters cuz just in the last
few months
the race has begun.
And it's a different kind of race
than what we're used to.
The way you drive a car is different
than the way you ride a horse. The way
you build a car is different than the
way you take care of a horse.
So it's a very different sort of race.
And one of the reasons that we wanted to
gather everybody here today is because
nobody has all the answers.
And the more time we can spend together,
the more we can learn and hopefully
figure out
where all this stuff is headed.
And it's important that we do so as soon
as possible
cuz there's a lot at stake.
Just from a commercial perspective
there's $10 trillion up for grabs. We
got labs coming at it from a tech out
approach. We got startups building on
top coming at it from more of a customer
back approach.
We do have all of the labs represented
in this room, but most of you are
building on top. And so we'll take a
minute and uh talk about that customer
back approach.
So our advice for those of you
who are building on top of the labs
is free advice and so it's worth every
penny you paid for it. Our our advice
would be to get mad.
And we don't we don't actually need you
to be angry. You can be angry if you
want. If that's what drives you, that's
cool. Go ahead and be angry. But this is
just a convenient acronym
for motes, affordance, and diffusion
which are three characteristics or three
pillars
of a strategy for building on top of the
models. First on motes
just for fun. Anybody remember this
slide from last year?
One person and he's my partner. Okay,
that's cool. Um
we're we're not going to
Okay, as a reminder this slide shows the
merchandising cycle which is the links
in the value chain required to take
something from an idea to a happy
customer. We're not actually going to go
through the links in the chain.
The point that I want to make here
if you approach things from a tech out
point of view, each link in the chain
gets approached a little bit different.
If you approach things from a customer
back point of view, each link in the
chain you approach a little bit
different.
Now here's the part that's
counterintuitive.
In a revolution of computation
which is about information processing
what you want to do
is look down here
because there's cool new stuff coming
out all the time.
What you should actually do for the sake
of building motes
is look up here
because your customers are not changing
nearly as fast
as the capabilities are changing.
The things that you built might be
irrelevant tomorrow.
The degree to which you wrap yourself
around your customers is going to be a
bit more durable.
That's not to say the product and
technology is not important. It is
insanely important. And generally
speaking best product wins.
But in a world where product changes so
fast because capabilities change so fast
in thinking about motes, we would
encourage you to go as customer back as
possible and think about all the ways
you can wrap yourself around those
customers.
Okay, the A in MAD stands for
affordance.
This is a term that we borrow from the
design world.
A hammer
is an object that has affordance.
I have a two-year-old son.
If I give him a hammer
he would know what to do with it. He
would grab it and start hitting stuff.
That's why we don't give him hammers.
Okay? An object with affordance
is one that doesn't need to be
explained.
People just know what to do with it.
Claude code is insanely powerful.
Go open up a terminal for the average
Fortune 500 employee and see how far
they get.
While it is powerful,
it does not offer that much affordance.
That's not a knock in on Anthropic,
but it is an opportunity for anybody who
wants to build on top.
And to create paths of least resistance
for your specific customers and their
specific problems so that it's just
brain dead simple for them to figure out
how to get to the outcome that they need
for their business. That's the concept
of affordance.
And then finally, the D in MAD is
diffusion.
And the diffusion gap is the opportunity
for companies building at the
application layer. The rate at which
capabilities are diffusing out into the
market is far shy of the rate at which
those capabilities are being created.
And every day that the foundation models
move faster than your average Fortune
500 enterprise, that gap gets bigger
and that opportunity gets bigger.
So, for motes,
try to think customer back.
For affordance, try to think about
creating those paths of least resistance
for your customers.
And that diffusion gap, that represents
your opportunity.
Unless that slide from earlier with the
white space starting to fill up was
discouraging for anybody, may we remind
you
that no lead is safe.
There's [clears throat] this expression
in racing. You cannot pass 15 cars in
the sun,
but you can pass 15 cars in the rain.
And right now there is a torrential
downpour
of new capabilities coming out of the
foundation models.
Which means that no lead is safe,
but it also means
that anybody can win.
What a time to be alive.
And with that, I'll hand it off to
Sonya.
>> [applause]
[applause]
>> Thank you, Pat. And can I just say it's
so nice to see so many friendly faces in
the audience. There is an exceptional
group of people here today and I'm just
really happy to be part of this
ecosystem with all of you. And so, the
purpose of my section is to talk about
what's happening in AI right now, which
for 2026 is agents.
Okay, flashback to 2022. Show of hands,
does anybody here remember AutoGPT or
BabyAGI? Okay. Okay. So, these projects
were overnight hits on GitHub and what
they did was they took GPT-3, gave it
some tools, wrapped in a loop, and let
it run towards a goal.
And it was promising until you watched
those agents just fail over and over and
over again.
Kind of cute, kind of endearing, but
completely useless.
And I put this slide here to remind us
that you know, we all knew agents were
coming. Uh we could have seen it years
ago,
but back in 2022, the models just
weren't ready yet.
Fast forward to today,
something around the turn of the year
really changed. Suddenly we have agents
everywhere around us and they seem to
actually be working.
Two agents in particular have been home
runs. Claude code for the technical
crowd and open claw and all of its
lobster brethren, uh which democratized
agents to anybody with a phone. And so,
whether you are a hardcore engineer or a
normie, the punchline is that anybody
can create agents now.
And so, what we're seeing is people are
building agents for everything. There is
silly stuff like an open claw agent that
will literally snitch on your neighbors
for tax fraud. Please don't do this. Or
actually, maybe please do this. Uh
there's entrepreneurial stuff. Agents
running generative media campaigns to
sell construction services.
And then there's the professional layer.
I can tell you there's a huge race
internally at Sequoia for who can build
the best agents to do our jobs better.
So, what does it mean to be an agent?
Here is one possible definition. An
agent is a system that perceives its
environment, chooses actions, and
progresses autonomously towards a goal.
By the way, guys, I made this in C dance
by myself. I'm I'm very proud of it.
>> [laughter]
>> The video models have come a long way.
Uh and more specifically, I view agents
as having three functional components.
First is the ability to reason and plan.
Uh this is the baseline level of
intuition and the ability ability to
think on the fly.
Second is the ability to take actions.
This is tools, search, write, compile.
And then finally, the ability to iterate
towards a goal. This is the persistence
that gives agents the ability to
accomplish things over long time
horizons.
And so, agency combines these three
things. It is simply the ability to get
done.
If we boil the agents down into their
constituent components, the models, the
tools, the harnesses, each component has
progressed rapidly over the last year.
First, the models are the brain. This is
the most important thing that's
happened. The meter chart measures uh
how long a model can sustain progress on
a complex task without going off the
rails. And we've gone from the order of
tens of minutes a year ago to the order
of hours today.
And so, this is this is the most
important thing that's happened. The
models are finally getting capable
enough to sustain per- performance on
long horizon tasks.
Second, the tools are the arms and the
legs.
These give models access to things that
make us productive on the computer. The
terminal for file systems and dev tools,
iMessage, Slack,
uh web search, computer use, you name
it.
And the last two decades that we spent
building tools for humans have ended up
being uh able to port over to be
incredibly useful for for agents as
well. And there's a common refrain that
SaaS is dead. I think to the contrary,
the value of these tools is going to
explode as the number of agents using
them increases.
Models and tools give agents capability.
The harness is what gives them
persistence, the ability to stay on
task, adapt, and keep going. And that
feedback loop is now really starting to
crank.
Especially now with reinforcement
learning, we're giving these agents uh
we're taking them to driving school,
giving them uh
you know, training them uh in RL gyms,
and we're pushing performance in
different settings from mechanical
engineering to design to finance.
We're also seeing the early glimmers of
self-improvement or the machine building
the machine.
Uh for example, Andrej's other research
project uh improves research
autonomously towards a GPT-2 level model
in just 2 hours.
So, what does the world of agents
everywhere look like?
Agents exist on a sliding scale of
agenticness. Um and so, let's take
coding as an example.
In 2023, we had tab auto complete, one
AI assisting a human in line. This was
incrementally useful, fundamentally not
transformative.
We now have agentic development, one
human talking to an agent, instructing
it what to do, maybe managing a team of
agents.
But this paradigm is getting pushed
further. We're now seeing background
agents, async agents, agents spawning
sub agents. We think that async agents
in this whole paradigm is likely to
overtake the current paradigm in volume
just because of the amount of leverage
in the system.
And then finally, pushing the bleeding
edge of the frontier, what I call dark
factories,
um taking human review out of the system
completely. This sounds crazy, but I've
seen it happen in production including
with cybersecurity companies. It is
possible with good enough guardrails and
good enough engineering.
So, we're progressing up a scale of
agenticness. Agents are going from
little helpers that do a little amount
by your side to interns that need to be
managed to interns that manage
themselves. And eventually to interns
that can be trusted enough to to push to
prod without oversight. And so, that's
the evolution that's happening not just
in coding, but across all of agents.
Uh the most important takeaway uh for
the founders in this room is that
services is the new software. Pat's been
saying this for as long as I've known
him. Uh and our partner Julian, who's in
the audience today as well, uh published
a great article on this. And we've known
this for a long time, but I think it's
actually happening. So, in medicine,
you're able to hire an agent that
inspects your genome, gives you
personalized recommendations, can
prescribe you medication, uh recommend
you clinical trials. And law, you'll be
able to hire agents that can negotiate
contracts on your behalf, even perform
litigation and settle for you.
In math and the sciences, we're seeing
agents that can solve air those problems
or discover new superconductors. Like
how thrilling is that?
Or in uh in the consumer world, personal
agents that can manage your inbox for
you, your calendar, your finances, uh
file your taxes.
And we expect there's going to be agents
everywhere and that's in part because
hiring agents is so much easier than
hiring employees.
Humans are hard to scale. Infinites are
infinitely scalable with compute.
Humans are hard to keep happy, except
for me, I'm always happy. Uh agents are
low maintenance.
Uh humans are
uh humans are expensive. You pay them
salaries.
Uh you pay agents tokens. Generally, it
costs less to accomplish a task with
tokens than the equivalent in salary.
Today, humans are still generally
smarter, but the bitter lesson presses
on and soon agents will be smarter at
many things. And so, the point of this
slide is not that we humans are out of a
job. Uh I think a uniquely human trait
is adaptability. But we do expect the
deployment of agents across the
application layer to be swift and at an
unprecedented rate and scale because the
economics are so clear uh and because of
the inherent scalability of bits.
So, if you add all this up, the number
of agents is ballooning on some sort of
exponential, maybe super exponential.
And I think we're about to hit the point
where things get genuinely
[clears throat] strange.
Uh what happens when commerce happens
between agents? Can they pay each other?
What happens when agents can actually
negotiate the terms of a transaction
with each other?
Are we going to have swarms of agents
policing us, preventing things like
cybersecurity Armageddon?
All we know is the world is getting
weird extremely quickly.
And so I'll close by channeling my inner
my inner Bene Gesserit.
Uh long horizon agents are here. The
curves that they're on is very clear.
And for founders, I think everybody has
examples of people that are
accomplishing insanely hard timelines
thanks to AI. So Nathan from Zed
accomplished a three-year moonshot
project over the holidays by himself
with cloud code. Uh Bret Taylor rebuilt
Sierra over a weekend. Um
the Notion team rewrote 8 million lines
of code in just 6 weeks. And so
everybody has these examples of
compressed timelines. But I think very
few people outside of the AGI labs have
seen what happens when you take these
compressed timelines and you stack them
on top of each other.
And that's what's possible now. And so
whatever you could imagine building over
the next 100 years, we think is now
possible in 100 days thanks to agents.
I will pass it over to Konstantin.
Thank you, Sonia.
>> [applause]
>> All right. Thank you so much, Sonia,
Pat, for the brilliant overview,
analysis. In this section, we're going
to talk a little bit about what's next.
Uh so the goal here is we all know we're
in an AI age.
What's it going to look like? What's it
going to feel like? How's it
characterized?
Earlier in the presentation, Pat
bifurcated technological revolutions
between compute and communication. We're
going to do another bifurcation here for
types of work.
There is physical work. This is a
package on the Pony Express. This is a
satellite on a Falcon 9.
Work equals force times distance,
physical movement. And then there's
cognitive work. This is Pythagoras
coming up with his theorem. This is
DeepMind solving the pro- protein
folding problem.
Conscious thinking.
These are very different types of work.
But we believe that they're going to
follow a very similar pattern in
revolution.
So let's talk about physical work
because we've been through this
revolution with the Industrial
Revolution.
For the vast majority of human history,
all the work
or virtually all the work for serving
humans was done by some sort of muscle.
People or animals. People moving
something or an animal pulling the human
along.
This starts at 1700, but it goes back
millennia.
Then things started to change.
Water and wind.
Steam engines.
And then things accelerated.
Steam engines, combustion, electric
motors.
Today, 2026,
you could estimate that 99 plus percent
of all the physical work done on planet
Earth for humans is done by machine.
The plane that brought you here,
the manufacturing of all the goods in
this room,
all the transportation that sets up for
the pinnacle of the human experience
you're having right now.
Well, we think a similar pattern's going
to happen in cognition.
We're just a little earlier on.
>> [snorts]
>> So for most of human history, all the
thinking on planet Earth for humans was
done primarily by humans. Maybe a little
bit for animals. The the sheepdog
chasing the sheep.
Right? And there was this sliver on top
of mechanical work, the astrolabe or the
clock.
Now, over the past
couple hundred years, there was not a
lot of progress until
electronic computation.
And in the past 100 years, think about
all the trillions of calculations that
are happening at any given moment to
serve you the human. All of that work,
all of that cognitive work that's
happening to serve us at any given
moment. Trillions of calculations.
We believe
that the neural network
is the next big wave.
And that in the near future, 99.9%
of cognition on planet Earth will be
done by machines.
Well,
the parallel is pretty stark.
And the good news is we've been through
a revolution like this.
The cognitive revolution is going to be
a lot like the Industrial Revolution.
Just much, much bigger and much faster.
So what's it going to be like living in
this future?
I'd like to share some motivations for
this future in the form of four [snorts]
short stories.
The first story.
In the mid-1800s, America wanted to
build a grand monument to our first
president and our greatest war hero,
George Washington.
So we designed the tallest building in
the world at the time, the Washington
National Monument,
and we wanted to cap it with the most
precious metal in the world, 100 oz of
the most precious metal in the world. So
precious, in fact, that we put it on
display at Tiffany's in Manhattan.
That metal
was aluminum.
Within decades of the completion of the
Washington National Monument,
a young inventor came up with
electrolysis,
the process of separating aluminum from
dirt.
And within decades,
aluminum
was used to wrap our candies and our
sandwiches,
and then tossed into the trash.
Aluminum
is intelligence.
Electrolysis
is artificial intelligence.
We're about to enter a world where some
of the most precious skills
that took decades to earn, PhD-level
skills,
are so instantly invoked
that right after using them, you can
crumple them up and throw them right in
the trash.
Story number two.
We are entering a world of alien design.
The world as we see it today is all
about design for humans.
You know, it's it's been optimized in a
way that makes sense to our brains
because we are doing almost all the
cognition in the world.
Well, when machines do the cognition,
it's going to be a little different. In
2006, NASA was optimizing an antenna for
a large space mission, satellite space
mission.
And traditionally, their antennas looked
like this. It was a beautiful geometric,
symmetrical pattern that optimized
surface area for some power constraints.
This time around, they said, "We're
going to hand it over to computer and
we're going to have an evolutionary
algorithm." A lot like reinforcement
learning.
The result,
this antenna right here.
Dramatically more productive. Not
intuitive to the human mind.
In this AI era, when we hand over
cognition to machines, we're going to
get results that are not intuitive to
us.
When AI's designing chips, cars,
buildings,
they might look dramatically different.
The world that we enter into, we have to
be open-minded because the AI is not
going to think like us.
It's going to have alien design.
The third motivation story is on
emerging sciences. Not emerging science.
We all know there's emerging science.
I'm talking about emerging sciences.
In the early Industrial Revolution, you
had great engineers like Newcomen and
Watt. And they perfected combustion
engines.
Basically, put a petrochemical into a
piston, ignite it on fire, millions,
billions of particles
explode,
move the piston, work.
For almost 100 years, all of that was
tinkering.
It was an engineer saying, "Ah, that
works a little bit better." Maybe
something you could see see like a
scaling law, but it was engineers
playing
with the product and seeing how they
could improve it a little bit.
Over 120 years after
Sadi Carnot came around
and formalized this in a new science,
thermodynamics.
He said, "Wait a second.
There are millions or billions of
particles. We can actually formalize
what that all looks like."
In this case,
there are billions of neurons, trillions
of tokens.
Right now, we're in the tinkering phase
of AI. Even if we think it's an
understood science, it's not.
In the future, we will have a science as
fundamental as thermodynamics introduced
in the next couple decades. Someone in
this room might come up with that
science.
And that science will be taught in high
schools. It will be that fundamental.
And it will help us master AI. It will
even help us master consciousness.
Fourth story.
The art of unreason.
So for the vast majority of human
history,
tens of thousands of years, art has been
a progression towards realism.
This is a cave painting from about
25,000 years ago.
Egyptian hieroglyphs.
Greek
pottery.
Uh Renaissance paintings.
uh
a grand transformation toward realistic
art. Just look at the difference
over tens of thousands of years, the
triumph of humanity.
And then,
engineering came along.
The daguerreotype, early photography.
And all of a sudden, what was spent
decades of life to perfect the skill of
getting every brushstroke perfect,
done.
So, how did the world react? They
thought that painting was over.
Oh, that's it. The machine can do it
better than any human.
Art is Art is ended.
Well, what happened? How did humans
respond?
Humans responded
by saying,
"Was the purpose of this art to capture
the moment in the way the eye sees it?
Or was it to capture the moment in the
way the heart and the soul sees it?"
Impressionism, expressionism, [snorts]
cubism,
neo-expressionism.
All these new forms of art are how
humanity responded to this dramatic
change in science.
2,500 years ago,
Greek philosopher Protagoras
wrote,
"Man is the measure of all things."
What he meant
is that nothing
in a vacuum
has value to humans.
Not aluminum,
not art,
not intelligence.
>> [snorts]
>> It only has value
because of the experience.
AI can do the work. AI will do the work.
But,
only the human connection
can give you a reason
to care.
That's why we're all in this room today.
A decade from now, work is going to be
dramatically different. Things are going
to change so much, but the one thing
that will be constant
is the relationships that you form today
with the person right next to you will
endure.
That's what you're going to look back
on. That's what's going to be valuable
from today.
So, I encourage you to form those
relationships with the people next to
you.
Enjoy your time together at this AI
Ascent,
and really lean into what makes us most
human.
>> [applause]